[MUSIC]
[SOUND] In this lecture,
we'll talk a little bit more detail about
the UART Protocol which is the serial
protocol that we're going to use for
debugging but also for other things.
So we'll get some detail about that.
So here's a picture of what
UART communication looks like.
So you've got two sides
to the communication.
The sender, the transmitter and
the receiver.
The transmitter is Tx.
The receiver is Rx, and you can see in
between the transmitter and the receiver,
there is a serial a single wire.
Now generally, there might be two but
there might be a ground but
let's say a single wire.
Serial out of the transmitter.
Serial into the receiver.
Now, if we look at the transmitter side,
you've got parallel data
coming in on the left.
So that typically would be a byte or
some chunk of data.
So let's say it's 8 bits, an 8 bit byte.
So 8 bits comes in.
The transmitter sends
those bits on serial out.
The bits get received by the receiver on
serial in and then it creates parallel
data and sends that back out on parallel
out to the rest of the system and
their these status bits.
So the data is serialized by Tx.
What that means is say 8 bits come in
on parallel in, they get serialized.
Set one at a time,
one bit at a time on serial out.
And then they deserialize
them on the receiving end.
So they come in one bit at a time and
then they get packaged into
chunks of probably 8 bits.
The status data, there's a status
of the Tx and the Rx on both sides.
The status is usually indicating the state
of the transmit and receive buffers.
So what that means is inside Tx and Rx,
inside the transmitter and
receiver you've typically got buffers.
So for instance on the receiving end,
you're probably gonna have
some receiving buffer.
So you'll be receiving one bit at
a time and filling up a buffer, and
once a buffer is full say
the buffer is 8 bits long.
Once the buffer is full
then you've got a byte and
you can send it out on parallel
out to the rest of the system.
So when these buffers are full,
you can't receive anymore.
So the receiver can't
receive if the buffer's full.
Also the sender can't send
if its buffer is empty.
So the status bits are basically
information about that that goes back to
the code running on the transmitter and
receiver to tell it if you should be able
to send a new piece of data or
receive a new piece of data and so forth.
Used for flow control.
Make sure that there's a constant
amount of or not constant but
at least a regular amount of flow.
So specifically, what you wanna
make sure is that the receiver
is receiving data at the same rate that
the transmitter is transmitting it.
If the receiver is receiving data
faster than the transmitter then
the transmitter can't keep up and
the receiver will be stopped.
And vice versa,
if the receiver is receiving data slower
then the transmitter will be too fast and
it'll have to stop.
So you wanna match those rates,
so that you don't lose any data.
So a UART timing diagram.
This is an approximate timing diagram but
this is the idea.
What this timing diagram
is showing you is,
it's showing you the value on that
serial wire between the transmitter and
the receiver,
the value that is on that wire.
Now, remember that value is one bit and
it's digital, so
we're assuming that's either high or low.
So you can see in this timing diagram,
the time is the x axis.
So the signal it starts
off high then it goes low
then there are these eight green blocks.
So on those eight green blocks,
those are 8 bits that are being sent.
Could be high or low and then it goes high
again, at the end of the communication.
So let's break this down,
this communication.
So this is an example of sending
one byte of data via UART.
So the first bit is the start bit and
that initiates the transfer.
So the start bit is that first bit
where it starts off high by default but
as soon as you wanna start
sending some data it goes low.
So you can see that first bit that
first chunk of time there, it's low for
one chunk of time, for one unit.
That is the start bit.
Now after that,
the next bits are the data.
So all those 8 bits that are green, those
are data and those can be high or low.
They're green and we don't draw them
as high or low, they can be either,
high or low.
So you send those bits high low for a
certain period of time and let's say, you
send it in chunk of eight which is common
but you can change that, with say 8 bits.
Then the last bits are the stock bits.
So you see after you've sent the 8
bits the signal is high, for
in this case two chucks of time.
Those are called stock bits.
And those tell the receiver okay,
I'm done sending now.
So this is how the start bit and
the stop bit are needed by their receiver
to know when communication is starting and
when it's ceasing and
in between that, you send the data.
So each bit that's being
sent has a certain duration.
It's sent on the wires for
a certain period of time.
Each bit transmitted for a fixed duration.
This duration has to be known by both
the transmitter and the receiver.
So before you can do serial
communication both the transmitter and
the receiver have to know every
bit is going to be either high or
low for a certain fixed period of time.
Some number of microseconds let's say or
milliseconds or whatever it is,
you have to know that ahead of time,
so that has to be configured.
So the baud rate determines the duration.
So the duration we'll call T,
it's the period.
T is the common letter people use for
the period.
So the duration is T,
the duration of a single bit.
Tha baud rate is the frequency.
It's the inverse of T.
So baud rate is the number
of transitions per second or
the maximum number of
transitions per second.
And it's typically measured
in bits per second
because you can send one
bit in every transition.
T the period equals 1 over f.
So if you know the baud rate, you invert
that and that give you the period.
So for instance,
common baud rate is 9600 tons baud.
9600 baud, if you invert that to 1 over
9600 is approximately 104 microseconds.
So what that's saying is, that if you
have agreed on a 9600 baud rate of
transfer then that means that when
the transmitter is sending a bit,
it keeps that bit high or low.
If it's zero, one, high or low.
Keeps that holds that bit for
104 microseconds approximately,
and that's what the receiver expects.
The transmission rate is
actually less than the baud rate.
So the baud rate is the rate at
which you're sending these bits.
But remember that in addition
to sending the data bits,
you're sending this padding there
are other bits that you send.
The start bit, that's a bit that you have
to send but just to initiate the transfer.
But it's not actually
containing real data.
So that's something of a waste.
It's an overhead put it like that.
It's not a waste you need it but
it's an overhead.
It's a bit of time that you send but
you can't send real data.
Also stop bits.
Say, you're using two
stop bits at the end.
Those are two more bits
that are not sending data.
So after the data transmission rate
is actually less than the baud rate.
Because there are start bits,
stop bits and also maybe a parity bit,
we'll talk about that.
So there are extra bits
that you're sending.
But the baud rate is the maximum
data transmission rate but
you can't actually achieve that.
You need start bits, stop bits and
parity bit which we'll talk about later.
Thank you.
[MUSIC]